Policy progress, assessment and next steps
Since our 2021 Progress Report, the Government has released a consultation on
the Jet Zero Strategy, with some new policy proposals. It is yet to publish the full Jet
Zero Strategy, which is due in July 2022. There have been some new commitments,
funding and ambition, but many policies are still lacking in detail. A major step has
been the commitment to an emissions pathway for UK international aviation by
2050.
~
This section is in three parts:
	(a) Policy progress
	(b) Assessment of policies and plans
	(c) Recommendations
	(a) Policy progress
In the absence of the full Jet Zero Strategy and with minimal detail on emissions
reductions in the Government’s May 2022 Flightpath to the Future policy paper,9
we do not have a full policy package to assess for aviation. The following areas
have seen new policy proposals:
~
	• International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) and international action.
The UK has taken some action to lead on aviation internationally, including
pushing to secure a long-term goal for international aviation emissions
consistent with the Paris Agreement and a strengthened CORSIA (Carbon
Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation) offsetting
scheme. However, the Government has provided limited detail on future
interactions and what it aims to achieve through international cooperation.
Further detail must be provided as soon as possible in the upcoming Jet
Zero Strategy.
~
	• Offsetting/removals. BEIS and DfT have consulted on the interaction of the
UK Emissions Trading Scheme (UK ETS) and CORSIA but are yet to commit to
a policy on this. The Government should commit to preventing operators
using CORSIA credits as a substitute for a UK Emissions Trading Allowance,
due to the insufficient quality and additionality of existing offsets. Their
quality prevents them being an acceptable contribution to UK carbon
budgets and should only qualify as part of the UK ETS once they can satisfy
strict eligibility criteria (equivalence, additionality, permanence,
sustainability.)
~
The Government is also consulting on other matters relating to aviation and
the UK ETS:
		– How sustainable aviation fuels (SAF) are treated under the UK ETS and
how take-up can be incentivised.
		– The feasibility and appropriateness of expending the UK ETS to include
non-CO 2 effects from aviation (although any policy will only be
implemented in the long-term).
~
The Department for Transport is
yet to publish its Jet Zero
Strategy, and many policies
continue to lack detail.
~
Progress in reducing emissions: 2022 Report to Parliament 344
		– Including UK-Switzerland flight paths under the UK ETS.
		– How the free allocation of UK ETS allowances for airlines should
operate.
~
	• Operational efficiency. The UK Government has committed to work through
the ICAO to ensure stringent international standards for aircraft emissions
are implemented as technology improves. It is seeking voluntary
agreement from all airlines to avoid tankering (i.e. carrying more fuel than is
needed for the immediate flight) where there is no practical reason to carry
extra fuel. It is asking for additional contributions on wider changes to
policies that may improve efficiencies.
~
	• Sustainable Aviation Fuels (SAF). The Department for Transport is consulting
on a UK SAF mandate from 2025 to enable the delivery of 10% SAF by 2030
and will be providing £180 million in funding to UK industry to support the
development of SAF plants. It has further committed £3m to the
development of a SAF clearing house.
~
	• Zero-emission aircraft. The Government has set an aspiration to have zero-
emission routes connecting the UK by 2030 and are looking at the feasibility
of using zero-emission aircraft on UK Public Service Obligation routes. It has
committed to £685 million of funding which, alongside industry funding, will
provide £1 billion to support the development of zero-carbon and ultra-low-
emission aircraft technology, alongside previous funding for ‘FlyZero’.
~
	• Demand management. The Government has proposed to strengthen
carbon pricing in the aviation industry as a way of increasing the price of
air travel and reducing demand. There is minimal detail in its strategy on
how this would work. Also, the Civil Aviation Authority, in their May 2022
sustainability strategy, have committed to consulting on carbon labelling
for flight routes to encourage consumers to chose the lowest emission flights
by the end of 2022.
~
	• Non-CO2 effects. The Government has published a Call for Evidence on
whether the UK ETS could be expanded to cover non-CO 2 emissions,
focusing initially on NOx.
~
(b) Assessment of policies and plans
Of the 13 recommendations in the 2021 Progress Report relating to the aviation
sector, one has been achieved and one has been partly achieved, while of the
ongoing recommendations, one is making sufficient progress, four are making
some but insufficient progress and six are not making progress. Figure 9.14 shows
the ambition of the Department for Transport’s scenarios relative to the CCC’s Sixth
Carbon Budget Balanced Pathway, together with the previous modelled scenario
produced by the Department for Transport and adjusted for the Net Zero Strategy.
Unlike other sectors, we include the pathway to 2050 due to the importance of the
later periods for aviation decarbonisation as technology required to abate
emissions in this sector will take a significant period to be commercially deployed.
For this analysis we use the baseline and pathway from the Jet Zero Strategy March
2022 further technical consultation, as it has the Department for Transport’s most
up-to-date assumptions. This assessment of progress in the aviation sector shows
there are significant risks to achieving the Government’s pathway (Figure 9.15 and
Table 9.2), particularly due to the heavy reliance on a technology-driven
approach without sufficient attempts to constrain demand.
~
Only two of 13
recommendations in 2021 have
been achieved or are making
sufficient progress.
~
The policy scorecard for aviation is based on our judgement of current
Government commitments for the decarbonisation of the sector and may change
once the full Jet Zero Strategy has been published.
~
(c) Recommendations
The recommendations in this sector are available in the accompanying tables in
the Annex (grouped by department) and on our website. The latter are filterable
by sector and by department.
~
The key priorities in the aviation sector are:
	• The Government must publish its Jet Zero Strategy as soon as possible. This
should provide a clear strategy for the sector to decarbonise and to
provide certainty to airlines, airports, and supporting industries.
	• To implement a SAF mandate as soon as possible in 2022 with strong
safeguards to ensure significant lifecycle emissions savings.
	• To consider the following criteria in the SAF mandate, without allowing this
to delay its implementation:
		– Measure the lifecycle savings from SAF and only include those with
minimal opportunity costs in other sectors in the mandate
		– Rule out any SAF that have greater non-CO2 effects relative to those
of fossil kerosene
		– Consider including high-quality, near permanent greenhouse gas
removals as a way of airlines meeting the SAF mandate
		– Only include SAF or other technologies that support a swift transition to
zero-carbon aviation
		– Fiscal policy (e.g. taxation, quotas or a frequent flyer levy) should be
used to increase the price of flying to reflect the high emissions cost of
air travel and incentivise low-emission alternatives.
~ For example, the
50% Air Passenger Duty cut for domestic flights could be reversed to
signal the high emissions cost of flying and incentivise low-emission
forms of surface transport (e.g. rail travel)
		– Assess the Government’s airport capacity strategy in the context of
Net Zero. There should be no net expansion of UK airport capacity
unless the carbon intensity of aviation can accommodate additional
demand
~
	• The Government should use its position at the 41st ICAO General Assembly
to influence international cooperation and to protect, strengthen and
extend CORSIA such that all residual emissions in 2050 are covered by near-
permanent, sustainable greenhouse gas removals.
		– We also recommend that the Government commits to a policy on the
UK ETS/CORSIA interaction as soon as possible, ensuring that it is
sufficiently environmentally stringent and that no credits from the
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation
(CORSIA) are used for flights currently covered by the UK ETS unless
and until they can satisfy strict eligibility criteria (equivalence,
additionality, permanence, sustainability). The interaction should avoid
double-compliance.
~
Key priorities for the
Department for Transport
should be to Implement a SAF
mandate and manage
demand growth.
~
	• To encourage airlines to quickly take steps to reverse the recent rapid
increase in fuel consumption intensity (see Figure 9.4) by eliminating the use
of ‘ghost flights’ and taking steps to increase seat occupancy by altering
routes and flight frequencies.
	• To measure aviation non-CO2 effects regularly and include a target to limit
the warming effects of both CO2 and non-CO 2 emissions from aviation.
	• Encouraging airlines and airports to set transition plans and, within these, set
separate targets for emissions reductions and high quality, technology-
driven removals (see Business and Finance Section in Chapter 14).
~
Demand management is particularly important as it can address both the CO2
and non-CO2 emissions from aviation, whereas technology primarily addresses the
CO2 emissions and relies on international cooperation.
Figure 9.16 shows a policy implementation timeline for aviation, including key
government commitments and gaps in the Government’s aviation strategy as it
stands.