Introduction and key messages
Aviation emissions continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We
estimate emissions in 2021 to be 15 MtCO 2e, similar to those in 2020, and still 62%
below those in 2019. Of these emissions, 89% come from international aviation (with
4% from domestic and 7% from military aviation).
~
It remains to be seen whether there will be lasting effects on aviation emissions
from the pandemic, high oil prices and increasing cost of living. The Government
set a pathway to reduce emissions to 15 MtCO2e by 2050, with the remaining
emissions balanced by near-permanent, sustainable greenhouse gas removals.
~
However, a full strategy on aviation has yet to be released, with the Government’s
Jet Zero Strategy due to be published in July 2022.
~
This Chapter reviews progress in reducing emissions from the UK aviation sector and
outlines our recommendations for delivering the Government’s aviation pathway
and meeting future carbon budgets.
Our key messages are:
~
	• Reliance on technology. Thus far, the Government’s pathways for aviation
in the Net Zero Strategy and Jet Zero Strategy rely heavily on technological
changes in aviation as the sector’s contribution to Net Zero and for the
removal of the sector’s residual emissions. This differs from the CCC’s
Balanced Pathway, which also limits demand growth alongside
technological improvements. Such heavy reliance on technology presents
significant risks that aircraft efficiency improvements and sustainable fuels
will under-deliver on emissions savings. Much of the delivery of emissions
reduction in the Government’s pathway requires global cooperation, joint
innovation and alignment.
~
	• Constraining demand. The Government’s announcements on aviation to
date have not set any ambition to constrain aviation demand growth
through policy, beyond vague proposals on carbon pricing, despite
demand measures being one of the few interventions that lowers both CO 2
emissions and non-CO2 effects from aviation. Given the risks outlined
above, as well as risks of under-delivery on emissions reductions in other
sectors, the Government should actively develop the option to implement
policy to manage aviation demand.
~
	• Policy developments. There have been funding announcements on the
development of Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF) plants, low-emission aircraft
technology, and a UK SAF clearing house. The Government has consulted
on implementing a SAF mandate, options to reduce non-CO2 emissions,
and on UK domestic aviation reaching Net Zero by 2040.
~
	• Sustainable fuels. The Government’s aviation pathway has a high reliance
on SAF, with the proposed mandate reaching 10% of fuels by 2030. It is
essential that supported fuels deliver genuine significant lifecycle emission
savings by then and that the resources used do not have adverse impacts
on decarbonisation in other sectors (e.g. land use), in the UK or overseas.
In this chapter we review progress in reducing emissions from the UK aviation sector
and outline the next steps required to ensure more progress and meet future
carbon budgets. We set out the:
1. Emissions trends and drivers
2. Indicators of progress
3. Policy progress, assessment and next steps
4. Major risks