  	-Introduction and key messages
~
	The past year saw key developments in international climate negotiations,
	assessment of climate science, and the continued worldwide roll-out of key low-
	carbon technologies. The invasion of Ukraine has led to record highs in fossil fuel
	prices and highlighted the role of the low-carbon transition in providing long-term
	energy security. In response, new policies are being announced in many countries.
	The increasing global coverage of national Net Zero commitments has advanced
	global ambition on longer-term emissions reductions. Current commitments have
	the potential to limit warming to around 2ºC. However, most of these commitments
	are not yet backed by credible plans and Paris Agreement-aligned 2030 targets.
	With global emissions falling far slower than required, the 1.5ºC target risks slipping
	out of reach.
~
	The UK can provide a powerful example by backing up its Net Zero pathway and
	plans with delivery. The UK must also continue to support international efforts by
	strengthening the implementation of agreements made at COP26 in Glasgow
	such that there is clear progress by COP27 in 2022.
	Our key messages on the global picture are:
~
	• Climate. The climate has continued to warm due to human activity. Major
		heatwaves, droughts and forest fires in many regions linked to the changing
		climate were seen in 2021.
~

	• Global emissions. The ongoing global economic recovery from COVID-19
		has resulted in a strong rebound in GHG emissions, with 2021 emissions back
		to around 2019 levels. Further increases can be expected if aviation
		demand returns to pre-pandemic levels and supply chain issues no longer
		limit global production.
~

	• International climate policy. The new commitments made at COP26 in
		Glasgow last November marked an overall advance in global emissions
		reduction ambition. These commitments bring the possibility of limiting end-
		of-century warming to around 2ºC into view, but only if they are delivered
		in full and on time.
~

	• Low-carbon technologies. There is continuing progress in the adoption of
		key low-carbon technologies with sustained global growth in renewable
		power. Electric cars and heat pumps are becoming more established and
		cheaper in major markets.
~
	• Forests. Estimated global tree cover loss has stayed broadly constant at
		around 25 Mha/year from 2018-2021. The Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on
		Forests and Land Use was launched at COP26 in November 2021,
		committing to collectively halt and reverse forest loss by 2030. Its signatories
		cover 90% of the world’s forests.
~
	• Ukraine. The invasion of Ukraine by Russia, and resulting record highs in fossil
		fuel prices, reinforce the case for a rapid transition away from fossil fuels.
		The high prices also highlight the benefits of reducing energy demand for
		both the Net Zero transition and continued economic growth. At the time
		of writing, the overall effect of the shift in global energy priorities and
		dynamics on future emissions remain unclear, though moves towards
		expanding fossil fuel production and pausing reductions in coal use risk
		increasing near-term global emissions.
~
	• UK as a climate leader. As a recognised leader on climate action, the UK’s
		continued commitment to delivering Net Zero strengthens the global effort.
