Global progress towards Net Zero
~
COVID-19 led to a temporary decrease in emissions. Achieving the Paris
temperature goal requires rapid and sustained emissions reductions across the
economy, which will require structural changes and transitions in all sectors.
National and corporate commitments to Net Zero send a signal to stimulate
innovation and demand in low-carbon technologies, which helps to drive cost
reductions. This section presents trends in key aspects of the global transition, with
a focus on those most relevant to the UK.
~
	• Power. Global progress in expanding renewable energy capacity (Figure
1.5) and policies to move away from coal and oil is accelerating but still
insufficient to steer a course towards the Paris temperature goal, with gas
use (pre-invasion of Ukraine) projected to continue along historical
trajectories (Figure 1.4).
~
	• Cars. Purchases of electric vehicles continue to soar, more than doubling
between 2020 and 2021 (Figure 1.6). Continued growth relies on expanding
charging infrastructure and access to sustainable supplies of critical
minerals which are increasingly under strain. The full benefits of transitioning
to electric vehicles requires deeper decarbonisation of the power sector
(Figure 1.4).
~
	• Heating. Installation of heat pumps continues to show steady growth of
around 10% per year, with uptake particularly strong in North America,
Europe and China. Heat pumps are increasingly established as the primary
low-carbon heating solution globally, but considerable growth is needed
through to 2030 to be on track towards Net Zero (Figure 1.7).
~
	• Forests. As recognised in the Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on Forests and
Land Use, preservation and restoration of global forests is critical to rapidly
reducing global emissions. Tree cover loss in 2021 is estimated at around 25
Mha (not including gains), a level that has been broadly constant since
2018 (Figure 1.8).
~
		– The primary driver of tropical forest loss is direct human action, such as
clearing for agriculture and forest commodities. While global tropical
deforestation levels have stayed at a similar level, Indonesia has
reduced deforestation levels for the fifth year running, demonstrating
how international standards combined with national policies can
deliver.
~
		– In boreal forests, 2021 had the highest recorded rate of tree cover loss.
This was mostly due to wildfires which have increased in severity as a
result of hotter and drier conditions linked to climate change.12
~
Progress is being made in key
aspects of the global transition.
This momentum must be
sustained and increased
throughout this decade.
~
Global energy use is starting to
transition but present and
stated policies will not bring
about the large-scale changes
required in energy use to reach
Net Zero.
~
Installed renewables capacity,
particularly of solar and wind,
continues to grow year on
year.
~
Sales of electric cars have
tripled since 2019, reaching 9%
of global car sales in 2021.
~
Heat pump installations are
growing rapidly in many
countries.
~
The global rate of tree cover
loss has not slowed since 2018,
but Indonesia has reduced its
deforestation rate.