 Policy progress, assessment and next steps
 ~
This section sets out progress made on developing policy for reducing emissions
from electricity supply in the past year, our assessment of that policy progress, and
our recommendations to be taken forward over the coming year.
~
	• There has been a wide range of recent policy developments. As part of the
Net Zero Strategy, the Government committed to fully decarbonising
electricity generation by 2035. It subsequently increased its ambition further
across a range of technologies in the ESS.
~
	• Credible plans are in place for over half the emissions reductions required in
2035 but some risks remain, particularly around renewables deployment
over the 2020s and nuclear.
~
	• Our recommendations reflect that the overriding challenge is now to
ensure that the Government’s ambitions are delivered.
	– A key gap in comparison to other sectors (e.g. heat and buildings,
transport) is the absence of an overarching delivery plan or strategy.
This should be developed as a priority.
	– Other key enablers will also need to be tackled, including electricity
market arrangements, onshore and offshore network capacity and
potential supply chain bottlenecks.
This section is in three parts:
	(a) Policy progress
	(b) Assessment of policies and plans
	(c) Recommendations
~
(a) Policy progress
The Energy Security Strategy
In response to the invasion of Ukraine, the Government published its ESS. This was a
welcome move which increased ambition across a range of areas with the aim of
reducing dependence on imported fossil fuels, in particular through faster
deployment of renewables.
~
Overall, the supply-side ambitions in the ESS were broadly appropriate, but actions
on the demand-side were limited and could have gone further:
~
	• Supply-side ambition. The ESS significantly increased the Government’s
aims for deployment of low-carbon technologies, including offshore wind,
solar, nuclear, and hydrogen production. Alongside this there were new
commitments to speed-up planning processes, scale-up network grid
connections and review electricity markets. Overall, despite a lack of focus
on the opportunities of onshore wind, this was an ambitious and stretching
package of measures.
~
Delivering on the
Government’s ambitions is now
the overriding challenge for
policy.
~
The Government has increased
ambition across a range of
areas in response to the
invasion of Ukraine.
~
• Demand-side ambition. The ESS was almost entirely supply-focused and
much of it will not be delivered until well after the immediate crisis has
passed. There remains an urgent need for equivalent action to reduce
demand for fossil fuels to reduce emissions and limit energy bills over the
longer term. That could include moving the policy costs due to historical
subsidies off electricity bills and onto general public spending, and a
sustained push for both energy efficiency improvements and electrification,
especially in the buildings sector.
~
Renewables
As part of the ESS, the Government increased ambition for offshore wind and solar,
and aims to improve the planning process for onshore wind. This is a welcome
move that will help reduce dependence on fossil gas, whether for electricity
generation or hydrogen production, while accelerating progress towards the
Government’s objective to fully decarbonise electricity supply by 2035.
~
	• Offshore wind. The Government increased its ambition for 2030 from 40 GW
to up to 50 GW, including up to 5 GW of floating offshore wind. That
compares to 11 GW installed currently. It has also committed to reducing
time taken for consenting new projects, from up to four years down to one
year.
~
	• Solar. The Government set out an expectation for a five-fold increase on
currently installed capacity by 2035, which would equate to a total of 70
GW. It also committed to consult in 2022 on amending planning rules to
strengthen policy in favour of development of ground-mounted solar on
non-protected land, and to consult on radically simplifying planning
processes for rooftop solar.
~
	• Onshore wind. While the ESS did not state an ambition for onshore wind
capacity, the Government did commit to consulting this year on
developing local partnerships for communities in return for benefits,
including lower energy bills.
~
2022 also sees the next round of auctions for low-carbon electricity contracts
(Contracts for Difference – CfDs), the results of which will be known in mid-2022.
Funding has been confirmed, and onshore wind and solar are now eligible to bid in
addition to offshore wind.
~
	• Offshore wind. £210 million per year has been made available for offshore
wind, and a minimum of £24 million per year for floating offshore wind.
These projects will be delivering from 2025, and there is no limit on the
amount of capacity that can be procured within the budget.
~
	• Onshore wind and solar. These technologies are now eligible to bid for
CfDs, and £10 million per year is available for Pot 1 technologies (which
includes onshore wind and solar). There is a limit of 5 GW capacity that can
be procured for Pot 1, with a maximum of 3.5 GW each for onshore wind
and solar.
~
	• Auction timings. The results of the auction will be known in mid-2022. The
Government has confirmed that auctions for CfDs will now be run annually,
providing project developers with a more regular pathway for accessing
these.
~
The ESS increased ambition on
renewables.
The results of the fourth round
of auctions for low-carbon
electricity contracts will be
known in mid-2022.
Auctions for low-carbon
electricity contracts will now
happen annually.
~
Nuclear
In the ESS, the Government significantly increased its long-term ambition for
nuclear. It also moved forward with a new funding model for new-build plants,
including funding next-generation nuclear projects.
~
	• Long-term ambition. In the ESS the Government announced an ambition to
deploy up to 24 GW of nuclear capacity by 2050, which could represent up
to 25% of UK electricity generation. In addition to taking one project to a
final investment decision (FID) this Parliament, the plan is now to take a
further two projects to FID in the next Parliament.
~
	• Funding. The Government has announced a new funding model, and has
created several new funds, to support new nuclear projects.
		– The Government has agreed to introduce a Regulated Asset Base
(RAB) model for funding new nuclear projects, and introduced
legislation for this in October 2021. The RAB model involves a levy on
consumer bills, which contributes to construction costs and transfers
some of the construction risk to consumers. While this helps reduce the
cost of capital for investors and therefore overall financing
requirements, it also means consumers are exposed to risks of potential
project delays and additional costs.
~
		– The Government has announced a new £385 million Advanced
Nuclear Fund and a £120 million Future Nuclear Enabling Fund.
Low-carbon flexibility
The Government has announced a range of new policies aimed at bringing
forward and facilitating new sources of low-carbon flexibility, including for
generation and on the demand side.
~
	• Low-carbon flexible generation. This can be delivered by a range of
different solutions, including hydrogen, carbon capture and storage (CCS),
and energy storage.
		– Hydrogen power plants. In summer 2021 the Government published
calls for evidence (CfEs) on decarbonisation readiness for new
combustion plants and on aligning the capacity market with Net Zero.
These aim to take into account potential for future hydrogen plants.
		– CCS power plants. The Net Zero Strategy set an objective for at least
one operational power CCS plant by the mid-2020s. In April 2022 the
Government issued a consultation on developing Dispatchable Power
Agreements to support CCS deployment.
		– Storage. In September 2021 the Government issued a CfE on
facilitating large-scale long-duration electricity storage. It also
committed to an aim for at least six long-duration storage
demonstrators to be in place by 2025, and has run and awarded
funding to 24 projects in a competition to deliver these.
~
	• Demand-side flexibility. In 2021 the Government published its Smart Systems
and Flexibility Plan and Digitalisation Strategy. These included a
commitment to move to half-hourly electricity market settlement by 2025,
and new smart meter installation targets for energy suppliers.
~
The ESS significantly increased
ambition for nuclear
deployment, and the
Government has announced a
new funding model for
delivering this.
Some progress has been made
developing policies for
low-carbon flexibility, across
hydrogen and CCS power
plants, and energy storage.
Steps are being taken to
establish the structures
necessary to enable demand-
side flexibility.
~
Both of these are needed to enable smart tariffs for consumers, which will
allow them to benefit from increased demand-side flexibility.
~
Networks
The ESS recognises that electricity networks will need to develop to keep pace with
decarbonisation of the system. It includes commitments on a new Future System
Operator (FSO), strategies to identify the required network developments for Net
Zero, and aims to speed-up delivery of strategic network infrastructure.
~
	• Future System Operator. In 2022 the Government announced the creation
of a new independent system operator. The FSO will take on some of the
existing operational roles of the National Grid system operator for the
electricity and gas system. It will take a wider strategic approach to
coordinating and planning those networks, as well as for new emerging
markets like hydrogen and CCS.
#
	• Network strategies. In addition to the ongoing Offshore Transmission
Networks Review, the ESS committed the Government to:
		– Publishing a strategic framework in 2022 with Ofgem for how networks
will deliver Net Zero.
		– Appointing an Electricity Networks Commissioner to advise
Government on policies and regulatory changes to accelerate
progress on network infrastructure.
		– Setting out a blueprint for the whole network system by the end of
2022 in a Holistic Network Design (HND) for offshore networks and
Centralised Strategic Network Plan (CSNP) for onshore transmission.
The HND will identify the strategic infrastructure needed to deliver
offshore wind by 2030.
~
	• Delivery timelines. The ESS aims to speed-up delivery of strategic network
infrastructure, including through:
		– An aspiration to halve the time taken to deliver strategic onshore
transmission network infrastructure.
		– Publishing a revised Strategy and Policy Statement to ensure Ofgem
expedites its approvals process to build networks in anticipation of
new sources of generation and demand.
~
Electricity market design
Moving to a fully decarbonised electricity system will have a range of implications
for how electricity markets will need to be designed and operated. In the ESS the
Government launched a Review of Electricity Market Arrangements, with an aim
to publish high-level options for market reform in summer 2022. To feed into that
process the Committee has set up an expert advisory group on electricity market
design (Box 6.1).
~
The Government has created a
new independent system
operator which will take a
wider strategic approach to
gas and electricity networks.
~
The ESS made a range of
commitments to ensure
electricity networks are fit for
Net Zero.
~
The Government is reviewing
whether electricity market
arrangements need to be
updated for Net Zero.
~
The Committee has set up an
expert group to advise it on
electricity market design and
to feed into the Government’s
review.
~
Good progress has been made
on policy but the absence of
an overarching delivery plan or
strategy is a key gap in
comparison to the approach in
other sectors.
~
Credible plans are in place for
over half the emissions
reduction needed in 2035, but
there are some risks around
renewables and nuclear
delivery.
~
(b) Assessment of policies and plans
Figure 6.10 and Table 6.2 set out our assessment of Government progress in the
past year. Good progress has been made across most elements. A key gap in
comparison to other sectors (e.g. heat and buildings, transport) is the absence of
an overarching delivery plan or strategy for full decarbonisation of electricity
generation by 2035.
~
	• Credible plans – for both ambition on capacity and policy to deliver that –
are in place for over half the abatement required in 2035, but some
delivery risks remain, including some unexplained emission reductions.
		– Positive aspects include the importance of renewables in providing
low-carbon electricity, and the success of Government auctions for
contracts in delivering that to-date.
		– Delivery risks remain, particularly around low-carbon flexibility and
nuclear.
~
	• There are some deployment risks around renewables and energy
storage, particularly over the 2020s. The Government has set very
ambitious deployment goals for renewables, and there are
potential barriers from planning, network capacity, and supply
chains. In the longer-term there is scope to catch-up on delays
provided these barriers are addressed.
~
	• More significant risks exist around policy to deliver low-carbon
flexibility at sufficient scale required to balance a renewables-
based system, and around timely delivery of new-build nuclear.
~
	• Actual emissions were significantly (44%) higher than the BEIS
pathway in 2021. Some of this is due to weather variability and
nuclear outages, but we have assessed this short-term divergence
as unexplained given uncertainty over how long it will persist.
~
	• Our assessment of the eight recommendations to Government in our 2021
Progress Report is that two were achieved, one partly achieved, and one
not achieved, with a further two underway and two making sufficient
progress.
		– In the Net Zero Strategy the Government accepted our high priority
recommendation to fully decarbonise electricity generation by 2035.
However, they have yet to develop a delivery plan or strategy for this.
		– Progress is being made with recommendations around electricity
market design and networks, albeit slowly. Concrete outputs from
these processes will need to be seen over the coming year.
~
Generally, good progress has
been made in implementing
our 2021 recommendations.
~
There are credible plans for
over half the emissions
reduction required in 2035, but
delivery risks exist over the
2020s.
~
(c) Recommendations
The recommendations for the electricity supply sector are available in the
accompanying tables in the Annex (grouped by department) and on our website,
where they are filterable by sector and department.
~
The Government has made strong commitments to fully decarbonise the sector by
2035 and increase the amount of low-carbon electricity generation capacity. The
key challenge is now to ensure that these ambitions are delivered on, and that
available low-carbon electricity can be fully utilised and is sufficiently reliable and
resilient.
~
Our recommendations are therefore focused on ensuring there is a clear delivery
plan in place and that key enabling factors are addressed:
~
	• Our overarching priority recommendation. The Government should publish
an overarching delivery plan or strategy, setting out how their objective of
a fully decarbonised electricity system by 2035 will be delivered.
		– This is needed to identify the contributions required from each
element, assess whether policies in place are sufficient to deliver that,
and to put in place contingencies for major risks.
		– A clear delivery plan will improve visibility and confidence for private
sector investors, helping reduce costs and build-up supply chains.
		– This is a key gap in comparison to other sectors (e.g. heat and
buildings, transport).
~
	• Our other priority recommendations. These cover the enabling factors
necessary to support an increasingly flexible low-carbon electricity system.
		– Electricity market design. Decarbonising the electricity system by 2035
will bring challenges which current market arrangements were not
designed for (Box 6.1). These need to be reviewed and updated
where relevant, in sufficient time to support the investment required
over the coming decade and ensure a smoothly running system.
		– Networks. Well-functioning and resilient onshore and offshore
electricity networks are needed to deliver electricity from generators
to consumers. As the economy increasingly electrifies it is important
that investments in resilient infrastructure are identified, planned,
consented and built, in sufficient time, to accommodate the new
demands and generation.
~
In addition, given the scale of deployment required across the sector, in new
sources of generation, storage, and networks, identifying and addressing potential
key supply chain bottlenecks will be critical to avoid delaying investment.
We will publish a separate standalone report on decarbonising electricity supply
later in 2022, as part of which we will review the scope of our recommendations.
~
Our priority recommendation is
to develop an overarching
delivery plan or strategy for
meeting the Government’s
objective of fully decarbonising
electricity supply by 2035.
~
Other enablers will need to be
addressed to ensure delivery of
2035 decarbonisation,
including market design,
networks, and supply chains.
~
The Committee will publish a
report on decarbonising
electricity supply later in 2022.

