Introduction and key messages
~
Reducing emissions from electricity generation and then using low-carbon
electricity to power the economy is a central part of reaching Net Zero. Sector
emissions have fallen rapidly over the last decade, and the Government has made
a strong commitment to fully decarbonise the sector by 2035. The key challenge is
now to ensure that these ambitions are delivered on, and that available low-
carbon electricity can be fully utilized and is sufficiently reliable and resilient.
Our key messages are:
~
	• Emissions. Largely due to a combination of nuclear outages and
exceptionally low windspeeds, emissions from electricity generation rose by
10% in 2021 compared to 2020 levels. With coal now all but removed, this
highlights the need to continue the rapid expansion of zero-carbon
generation and develop flexible low-carbon alternatives to gas.
~
	• Policy progress. In the past year the Government has committed to
electricity generation being 95% low-carbon by 2030 and fully
decarbonised by 2035. It has also made stretching commitments to
increase low-carbon capacity from renewables and nuclear, although
these have some delivery risks. Overall, credible plans are in place for over
half the emissions reduction required in 2035.
~
	• Recommendations and next steps. The overriding challenge is now to
ensure that the Government’s ambitions are delivered.
		– A key gap in comparison to other sectors (e.g. heat and buildings,
transport) is the absence of an overarching delivery plan or strategy.
This would improve visibility and confidence for private sector investors
and should be developed as a priority. It should set out the
Government’s approach and the requirements for a fully
decarbonised, resilient electricity system by 2035.
		– Key enablers will also need to be tackled, including ensuring electricity
market arrangements are fit for a low-carbon system, that both
onshore and offshore network capacity and access is in place to
support increasing electrification of the economy, and that potential
supply-chain bottlenecks are addressed to avoid delaying investment.
		– The Committee will publish a report later in 2022 setting out how a
decarbonised and resilient electricity system could be delivered.
~
The evidence underpinning these key messages is set out in four sections as follows:
			1. Emissions trends and drivers
			2. Indicators of progress
			3. Policy progress, assessment and next steps
			4. Major risks
 

