The UK’s international role in 2022 and beyond
This section considers the international role of the UK following COP26. This includes
the UK’s 2030 emissions target, the actions needed from the UK resulting from the
Glasgow Climate Pact and COP26 Pledges, and the UK’s international climate role
through 2022 as outgoing president of the UN COP process. It also sets out the
Committee view on the forthcoming UK Strategic Framework 2030 on International
Climate and Nature Action.
~
(a) The UK’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)
	• The UK NDC is ambitious and consistent with the Paris temperature goal
(Figure 1.11). The at least 68% emissions reduction on 1990 levels was set in
line with the Committee’s independent advice. This was set out in our 2020
Sixth Carbon Budget report, which took a holistic approach, considering all
aspects of the UK’s contribution to tackling climate change, including
assessing a ‘fair and ambitious’ contribution from the UK to the Paris
Agreement.
~
		– The UK NDC involves around a 55% reduction in CO 2 from 2010 to 2030,
excluding international aviation in line with UN convention. This is a
greater reduction in CO2 emissions than global scenarios consistent
with 1.5°C (-45% from 2010 to 2030). It also involves earlier, faster
deployment of low-carbon solutions than those scenarios. Figure 1.11
shows the UK targets in the global context in terms of all GHGs.
		– In Climate Action Tracker’s assessment of domestic targets for 40 of
the highest-emitting countries and the EU, the UK is the only one with a
domestic 2030 target considered to be compatible with 1.5°C.
~
	• The Committee’s view is that the UK should focus on delivery of the NDC.
Demonstrating that ambitious domestic emissions reductions can be
delivered is key to influencing and encouraging others. Delivery will also
help global efforts through driving low-carbon technology development
and cost reduction.
~
	• The UK’s NDC should be updated to clarify how it will be delivered. We
recommend that the NDC’s technical annex - the Information to facilitate
Clarity, Transparency and Understanding (ICTU) – is updated to detail its
delivery through the Net Zero Strategy and other plans (e.g. the Energy
Security Strategy). It should set out expected sector contributions including
the amount of removals. It should also explain the UK’s approach to the
Just Transition; public engagement and participation; governance,
accountability and reporting; and how adaptation is being integrated into
the delivery of the NDC. We note that legislating the NDC into domestic
climate law remains an option in the future.
~
The ambition of the UK’s NDC
can provide leadership on the
global stage. The UK should
now focus on delivery, to
demonstrate putting ambition
into practice.
~
The rate of emissions reduction
implied by the UK NDC is
consistent with the rates of
reduction in 1.5ºC and 2ºC-
compliant scenarios from the
IPCC.
~
(b) UK actions on COP26 Pledges and Glasgow Climate Pact
	• The UK Government must ambitiously and transparently lead by example
across all Glasgow Climate Pact commitments and COP26 Pledges signed
by the UK. The Committee intends to monitor both the UK’s domestic
compliance and international role in supporting the COP Pledges and
Glasgow Climate Pact commitments (Box 1.7).
~
	• Ensure all UK international climate finance commitments are delivered
including the £11.6 billion from 2021/2022 to 2025/2026, the extra £1 billion in
2024-2025 announced at COP26 to support clean technology and green
infrastructure, and the 30% allocation to climate financing for green growth
from British International Investment (formerly CDC Group plc).
~
	• The Government should set out its approach to meeting COP26
commitments and pledges before COP27 (Box 1.7), explaining how
domestic compliance and achievement will be ensured and how the UK
will support these initiatives internationally.
~
	• The Government should set out how it intends to support the Global
Methane Pledge by committing to reducing domestic methane emissions
by at least 30% by 2030 on 2020 levels, and by clarifying longer-term UK
ambition for methane reduction (this was not separately identified within
the UK Net Zero Strategy).
~
	• The Breakthrough Agenda across power, road transport, steel and
hydrogen could be an effective delivery mechanism across many Pledges.
We welcome and strongly encourage the UK COP Presidency commitment
to establish the Global Checkpoint Process to annually track and review
progress through to 2030.
~
	• The Just Energy Transition Partnership with South Africa, which promised a
$8.5 billion support package from the EU, France, US and UK to facilitate a
timely and fair transition from coal power, sets an important example for
transition partnerships with other countries. Before COP27, the partnership
should set out implementation progress and learnings on how this model
could be replicated in other sectors and countries.
~
	• International Carbon Markets (Article 6 of the Paris Agreement) agreed at
COP26 can play a key role in increasing global ambition. While the
Committee’s advice is that the UK should not use international credits to
meet UK carbon budgets, the UK should support the operationalisation of
Article 6 through capacity building, support in meeting reporting
requirements and developing policy on linkage with voluntary carbon
markets (see Chapter 14).
~
The Government should be
proactive in following up on
COP26 agreements and
pledges with meaningful policy
action.
~
The CCC will begin to monitor
progress against Glasgow
Climate Pact commitments
and COP26 sector pledges and
commitments.
~
(c) Implications for UK adaptation action
For the UK to effectively support international efforts on climate change
adaptation an ambitious, cross-cutting and well-implemented domestic
adaptation programme is essential. This can help serve as a template for what a
credible response to the climate risk challenge can look like beyond the UK.
In addition to demonstrating good practice through its domestic adaptation
efforts, the UK should continue to support adaptation internationally through and
beyond the UK’s COP Presidency.
~
	• This includes maintaining a broadly 50:50 split between mitigation and
adaptation in UK International Climate Finance, supporting constructive
dialogue on loss and damage, and collaborating internationally to support
further understanding and action on adaptation, such as through the
Adaptation Research Alliance launched at COP26.
~
		– As climate finance actions are not fully separable from broader
development support, Official Development Assistance should be
restored to 0.7% of Gross National Income once the conditions
originally set out by HM Treasury are met.
Support for international
adaptation action must be
complemented with an
ambitious, cross-cutting
domestic adaptation
programme.
~
Progress in reducing emissions: 2022 Report to Parliament 70
	• The UK should also set out a frequency with which it intends to update its
Adaptation Communication to help these genuinely drive enhanced
ambition on adaptation, similar to the NDC ambition cycle. The UK should
act as a champion for this.
~
(d) The UK’s international role after COP26
COP26 secured an increase in global mitigation ambition and demonstrated
countries’ ongoing commitment to the multilateral climate process. Over the
coming year, all countries will need to focus on translating their enhanced
commitments into policy action and addressing remaining gaps across all three
goals of the Paris Agreement on the road to COP27.
~
As outgoing COP President, the UK should maintain its diplomatic effort on climate
change, focusing on issues including 2030 mitigation ambition, climate finance
and the phaseout of fossil fuel subsidies. The UK should also seek to build on the
international collaborations achieved over the past year. Partnerships such as the
South Africa Just Energy Transition and the UK-India Climate Finance Leadership
Initiative are an important step in unlocking the benefits of energy transition
around the world and should be implemented at pace and replicated elsewhere.
Above all, it is crucial that the UK consistently demonstrates strong, proactive
climate leadership both at home and through wider international actions. This
leadership must extend to areas such as trade policies and consumption emissions
and Chapter 14 sets out the Committee’s view on these areas.
The Strategic Framework 2030 should set out a cohesive Government plan on
advancing international action on mitigation, adaptation and nature that spans
departments and involves the UK leading by example.
~
In March 2022 the Government issued a Call for Views on the UK 2030 Strategic
Framework intended to guide the UK’s longer-term role in tackling climate change
and biodiversity loss around the world. The Committee’s views are set out in Box
1.8.
~
The Strategic Framework 2030
should set out a cohesive
Government plan on
advancing international action
on mitigation, adaptation and
nature that spans departments
and involves the UK leading by
example.
~
The International Climate
Councils Network (ICCN) is a
group of 20+ climate councils
from across six continents. Its
mission is to foster collaboration
between councils and improve
climate governance.
