    -Our Current Climate
    
    ~
    Every year, before the end of June, the CCC has to report to Parliament on our
    assessment of the Government’s performance in combating climate change. We
    measure its actions, overall and Department by Department, against the national
    and international legal obligations to which Britain is committed. This year, the UK’s
    presidency of COP26, has driven world-class leadership backed not only in our
    2050 Net Zero target but in signing up to a 68% cut in our emissions by 2030 and
    78% by 2035, compared to 1990 levels. It is to the Government’s credit that the
    significant successes of the COP were possible only because of British
    commitments.
    ~
    In targets, the UK is indeed a world leader. However, this Progress Report reveals
    that, despite important achievements in renewable energy and electric vehicles,
    the Government is failing in much of its implementation. Sharply rising fuel costs    
    should have given added impetus to improving energy efficiency, yet the    
    necessary programmes are not in place. We are still building new homes that do    
    not meet minimum standards of efficiency and will require significant retrofitting.    
    Not only are we waiting for the promised Future Homes Standard but there is as
    yet no sign of the changes in the planning system necessary to reflect Britain’s
    legal obligations for climate mitigation.
    ~
    The UK’s international leadership in commitments will only be effective if the world
    also knows that we will keep our word and that we have programmes in place
    that are clearly capable of delivering those commitments. Both issues must be put
    beyond question. For that reason the CCC will in future be concentrating even
    more centrally upon the delivery and implementation of the targets which are
    now enshrined in statute and international agreements. The Government has set
    the right course. It has now to deliver on the scale and urgency that is required