International context in 2022
The invasion of Ukraine, in addition to the rise in energy resource demands as the
global economy recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic, has shifted global energy
priorities and dynamics. Alongside the UK, the EU, its member states and the US
have set out policies to reduce dependence on energy resources from Russia and
address rising energy prices (Box 1.1).
The overall effect on emissions in the near and longer-term remains unclear at this
stage with some responses potentially decreasing emissions in some regions and
sectors, and others leading to a likely increase.
	• The sharp increase in fossil fuel prices improves the cost advantages of
renewable power generation, electric cars and investment in energy
efficiency. Alongside commitments to accelerate the roll-out of
renewables, this has led to greater consumer demand for end-use
electrification (e.g. in transport and heating) and energy efficiency
measures. These actions have the potential to lead to faster roll-out and
greater emissions reductions for these sectors in some regions.
	• The EU and some European counties are also advising their populations and
businesses on immediate measures they can take to reduce their energy
demand, such as reducing heating and using public transport.
	• However, in some countries, concerns around energy prices and security
have resulted in consideration of temporarily pausing coal power
reduction/phase-out programmes and possibly building additional new
coal capacity. This could result in higher-than-forecast global power sector
emissions.
	• High fossil fuel prices, and policy commitments from Europe to reduce
imports of fossil fuels from Russia, are leading to investment in new fossil fuel
production and fossil fuel infrastructures. This includes export and import
terminals for liquified natural gas (LNG) which, due to the energy required
for liquefaction, could also be more carbon-intensive. This risks lock-in as
these new assets might operate for many decades.
	• The steep rise in gas prices is also leading to reassessment of the role of gas
in the low-carbon transition, including the cost and resulting availability of
low-carbon blue hydrogen produced from gas using carbon capture and
storage (CCS).

The invasion of Ukraine has
shifted global energy priorities
and dynamics.

High fossil fuel price increases
are making some low-carbon
technologies more cost
competitive.

Energy security concerns may
lead to new fossil fuel
investments risking lock-in.

The EU has set out plans to
reduce its dependence on
fossil fuels from Russia through
accelerating the low-carbon
transition and diversifying fossil
fuel supply.

The G7 has reaffirmed its
commitment to meeting
climate objectives.