Progress in international climate policy
International climate policy in 2021 focussed on the UN negotiations at COP26. The
resulting Glasgow Climate Pact (Box 1.6) and associated sector-level pledges
strengthened global commitment to climate action, but major gaps remain,
especially in near-term ambition and delivery.
In this section we summarise the key outcomes from COP26 and then set out the
potential emissions pathways and temperature outcomes that they could lead to.
(a) Key outcomes of COP26
The UK COP Presidency helped to deliver meaningful overall progress in
international climate negotiations. This section summarises the findings of the
December 2021 CCC report 'COP26: Key outcomes and next steps for the UK'.
	• Glasgow Climate Pact. The Glasgow Climate Pact agreed at COP26
represents important progress in the UN climate negotiations. Recognising
the severity of impacts above 1.5ºC warming, it resolves to pursue this
target and sets out that this will require a 45% reduction of CO 2 emissions
from 2010 levels by 2030 (around a halving of emissions from today’s
levels)13 along with deep reductions in non-CO 2 GHGs, followed by
reaching Net Zero CO 2 by mid-century. The Pact sets out the following
actions for countries to take:
		– During 2022, revisiting 2030 Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC)
emissions targets to ensure they align with the Paris temperature goal.
		– Phasing down unabated coal power and phasing out inefficient fossil
fuel subsidies.
		– By 2025, doubling developed countries' collective provision of
adaptation finance (on 2019 levels).
		– Establishing the Glasgow-Sharm el-Sheikh work programme to better
measure and implement the Global Goal on Adaptation and the
Glasgow Dialogue to discuss arrangements for the funding of activities
to avert, minimise and address Loss and Damage (harms caused by
climate change).
	• Long-term ambition to reduce emissions has aligned around Net Zero. A
key aim of the UK Presidency was to encourage more countries to set Net
Zero targets. Following COP26 approaching 90% of global emissions are
now covered by a Net Zero target commitment (Figure 1.9).
		– Action is now needed to make these targets meaningful and robust.
This can involve, where applicable, clarifying their coverage (CO 2 or
all GHGs), placing them in legislation, and setting out clear pathways
to reach them, as has been done in the UK.
		– International commitments should be accompanied by updated
formal submission of Net Zero plans and policies to the UN as Long-
Term Strategies.

The Glasgow Climate Pact
highlights the risks of exceeding
1.5ºC warming and sets out key
actions for countries on NDCs,
climate finance and
adaptation.

Meeting the Paris temperature
goal will require strengthening
and implementation of 2030
emissions reduction targets.

	• Near-term ambition remains well short of delivering the Paris temperature
goal. Many countries put forward 2030 Nationally Determined Contribution
(NDC) emissions reduction targets that fall short of alignment to the Paris
temperature goal. (The rate of emissions reduction to meet the UK target is
consistent with Paris-aligned global pathways – see Section 5 below).
		– For the G20, assessment by Climate Action Tracker finds that 11
countries, amounting to around 50% of present global CO 2 emissions*
have 2030 domestic targets that are insufficient to meet the Paris
temperature goal. As requested by the Glasgow Climate Pact, these
targets should be revisited and the headline emissions reduction
ambition strengthened ahead of COP27.14
		– For G20 countries with NDCs rated as ‘almost sufficient' (aligned to
below 2ºC, but not to 1.5ºC) – the EU, US, Japan, South Africa and
Canada† – the status of implementation policies is mixed. Revised and
strengthened NDCs submitted ahead of COP27 should prioritise clear
plans for delivery and explore further increases in 2030 ambition in line
with the Glasgow Climate Pact.
	• The rules for implementing the Paris Agreement were finalised. COP26
concluded negotiations on Article 4 (timeframes for future NDC
submissions), Article 6 (rules for international trading of emissions reductions
and removals), and Article 13 (country reporting of emissions, mitigation
and adaptation actions, and finance contributions).
	• The 2020 $100 billion goal for climate finance is yet to be delivered.
Developed countries did not meet their commitment to mobilise $100 billion
of climate finance a year by 2020. Delivery of agreed finance
commitments is needed both to support mitigation and adaptation in
developing countries and for maintaining trust and commitment to all goals
of the Paris Agreement. Developed countries must meet this commitment
by 2023 at the latest.
	• The need for increased focus on adaptation was recognised. Some
additional funding was pledged to the Adaptation Fund and Least
Developed Countries Fund but more needs to be done. Progress on the
Global Goal on Adaptation work programme and on delivering the
developed countries’ committed doubling of adaption finance (see Box
1.6 on the Glasgow Climate Pact) will be of high importance as we look to
COP27, where these topics will be a major focus.

Further progress is needed on
climate finance and
adaptation, particularly around
the delivery of pledged actions
from developed countries.

* Countries’ CO2 emissions as a percentage of global total CO2 emissions are calculated using data from Ritchie et
al. (2020) CO2 and Greenhouse Gas Emissions, published online at OurWorldInData.org.
† Countries with NDCs with Climate Action Tracker ratings of ‘almost sufficient’ (the EU, US, Japan, South Africa and
Canada) and ‘1.5ºC Paris Agreement compatible’ (the UK) represent around 30% of global CO 2 emissions.

(b) Global emissions reduction ambitions
Full implementation of the NDCs and Net Zero targets brought to COP26 can move
global emissions pathways some of the way towards meeting the Paris Agreement
temperature goal. However, large ambition gaps remain in the near term to 2030,
and the full range of possible warming must be considered in assessing how well
global ambitions address climate change risks (Figure 1.10).
	• Full implementation of the NDCs and Net Zero commitments could limit
end-of-century warming to just below 2ºC. A recent study by Meinshausen
finds that full implementation of COP26 commitments could limit peak
warming to 1.9–2.0°C with a 50% probability (5%–95% range of 1.4–2.8°C).15
This corroborates the findings of analyses by the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP)16, Climate Action Tracker (CAT)17 and the IEA18
immediately after COP26.
	• Major progress must be made on near-term emissions reduction. All
estimates of post-COP26 global pathways show large gaps in global
ambition to 2030. This lack of ambition calls into question the credibility of
Net Zero goals and risks warming of well above 2ºC.
	• The COP26 sector pledges on forests, methane, fossil fuels and transport
could help close some of the emissions reduction gap to 2030. The Energy
Transitions Commission (ETC) and CAT have assessed the maximum
potential of sectoral pledges suggesting that, in combination with NDCs,
they could reduce 2030 emissions by around 20-25% from the ‘current
policies’ trajectory. This is around half of the reduction estimated to be
needed to limit warming to 1.5°C (Figure B1.6).
		– The UK should take a leading role in ensuring that these pledges result
in meaningful policy action through supporting creation of
governance and delivery mechanisms and, where applicable,
securing further signatories.

COP26 improved the outlook
for global emissions pathways
but a major ambition gap
remains, especially in the near
term to 2030.

Analysis shows continuing with
existing policies is likely to result
in around 2.7°C of warming.
Even full implementation of
COP26 NDCs and Net Zero
targets is unlikely to limit
warming to 1.5°C.

The sectoral pledges made at
COP26 have potential to
contribute to near-term
emissions reductions if they are
followed up with meaningful
policy action.

