Introduction and key messages
The past year saw key developments in international climate negotiations,
assessment of climate science, and the continued worldwide roll-out of key low-
carbon technologies. The invasion of Ukraine has led to record highs in fossil fuel
prices and highlighted the role of the low-carbon transition in providing long-term
energy security. In response, new policies are being announced in many countries.
The increasing global coverage of national Net Zero commitments has advanced
global ambition on longer-term emissions reductions. Current commitments have
the potential to limit warming to around 2ºC. However, most of these commitments
are not yet backed by credible plans and Paris Agreement-aligned 2030 targets.
With global emissions falling far slower than required, the 1.5ºC target risks slipping
out of reach.
The UK can provide a powerful example by backing up its Net Zero pathway and
plans with delivery. The UK must also continue to support international efforts by
strengthening the implementation of agreements made at COP26 in Glasgow
such that there is clear progress by COP27 in 2022.
Our key messages on the global picture are:

	• Climate. The climate has continued to warm due to human activity. Major
heatwaves, droughts and forest fires in many regions linked to the changing
climate were seen in 2021.
		– The new reports of the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) show that climate change has caused widespread
impacts to ecosystems and people. These will become more severe as
global temperatures continue to increase. The impacts at even 1.5ºC
of warming will be serious, but adaptation can help. Adaptation will
be more challenging above 1.5ºC.1
		– The IPCC finds that limiting temperature increases to 1.5ºC will require
peaking of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions as soon as possible
and no later than 2025, with rapid and deep reductions towards Net
Zero thereafter.2
	• Global emissions. The ongoing global economic recovery from COVID-19
has resulted in a strong rebound in GHG emissions, with 2021 emissions back
to around 2019 levels. Further increases can be expected if aviation
demand returns to pre-pandemic levels and supply chain issues no longer
limit global production.
	• International climate policy. The new commitments made at COP26 in
Glasgow last November marked an overall advance in global emissions
reduction ambition. These commitments bring the possibility of limiting end-
of-century warming to around 2ºC into view, but only if they are delivered
in full and on time.
		– However, the major gap in 2030 ambition and delivery threatens the
credibility of countries’ Net Zero targets. The Glasgow Climate Pact
requests countries to strengthen their 2030 targets to align with the
Paris Agreement temperature goal by the end of 2022.
Progress in reducing emissions: 2022 Report to Parliament 46
	• Low-carbon technologies. There is continuing progress in the adoption of
key low-carbon technologies with sustained global growth in renewable
power. Electric cars and heat pumps are becoming more established and
cheaper in major markets.
	• Forests. Estimated global tree cover loss has stayed broadly constant at
around 25 Mha/year from 2018-2021. The Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on
Forests and Land Use was launched at COP26 in November 2021,
committing to collectively halt and reverse forest loss by 2030. Its signatories
cover 90% of the world’s forests.
	• Ukraine. The invasion of Ukraine by Russia, and resulting record highs in fossil
fuel prices, reinforce the case for a rapid transition away from fossil fuels.
The high prices also highlight the benefits of reducing energy demand for
both the Net Zero transition and continued economic growth. At the time
of writing, the overall effect of the shift in global energy priorities and
dynamics on future emissions remain unclear, though moves towards
expanding fossil fuel production and pausing reductions in coal use risk
increasing near-term global emissions.
	• UK as a climate leader. As a recognised leader on climate action, the UK’s
continued commitment to delivering Net Zero strengthens the global effort.
		– Implementing the Net Zero Strategy3 and Energy Security Strategy4
can continue to demonstrate how the low-carbon transition can
reduce emissions, reduce consumer costs, and increase energy
security by reducing exposure to fossil fuel markets.
		– Follow-up policies on demand reduction would send a strong global
signal and bring immediate economic benefit. This would further
strengthen the UK’s credibility as a leader and highlight this area as an
immediate opportunity internationally.
		– The UK should focus on delivery of its 2030 emissions reduction target
(a 68% reduction on 1990 levels by 2030) and set out in detail how this
will be achieved in its revised submission to the UN.
		– As President of the UN COP process until November 2022, the UK has a
key role in continuing to coordinate international progress, including
on climate finance (especially for adaptation) and formalising the
sector pledges made at COP26.
The rest of this chapter is laid out as follows:
1. International context in 2022
2. Global climate, emissions and adaptation
3. Global progress towards Net Zero
4. Progress in international climate policy
5. The UK’s international role in 2022 and beyond